# Conclusion

In its presented state, the Annotation Interface fulfills its aim of
facilitating the process of research, curation and administration of
patient-oriented, multilingual information for PharMe. This is primarily
achieved by making data administration interactive and modularizing the
information to be made up of predefined textual components, \glspl{brick},
rather than free text.

The modularization has been found to increase the consistency, maintainability
and curation efficiency of information, while also laying the foundation for the
desired support of multiple languages: With information made up of a finite
number of \glspl{brick}, the task of providing current and future information in
an additional language is reduced to translating all \glspl{brick} once.

By testing the Annotation Interface with the consulted \glsa{pgx} expert, I have
verified its efficacy at meetings its research aim and gained further insights
into what capabilities for data administration would be crucial if PharMe was to
be implemented in a clinical setting.

To be used in a clinical setting with users having independent and unsupervised
access to the data PharMe provides, higher certainty in correctness needs to be
ensured. The most crucial features to achieve this are (1) providing curators
with functionality to stage and review data before making it accessible to
users, and (2) keeping a revision history of all data presented to users.

The Annotation Interface as a system provides an approach to attend PharMe's
need for data administration by \gls{pgx} experts. The explored concepts of
modularized information as well as needs for clinical settings comprise relevant
insights towards establishing systems to solve similar problems for other
health-related informative resources.
