# Conclusion

This thesis explored how to support field experts in their process of
researching, curating, and maintaining \gls{pgx} data for the patient-oriented
\glsa{pgx} service PharMe, as well as how to provide this data in multiple
languages.

Within this context, I explained PharMe's preexisting approach to data
administration and discussed the related complications, namely its high
communication complexity and susceptibility to human error. Subsequently, I
conceptualized, implemented and tested the Annotation Interface as a method of
solving these complications while creating the fundamental infrastructure
towards multi-language support. I conducted this work in consultation with an
expert in the field of \glspl{pgx}.

In its presented state, the Annotation Interface fulfills its aim of
facilitating the research and curation process of patient-oriented information
for PharMe. This is primarily achieved by modularizing the information, which,
  while increasing its consistency, maintainability and curation efficiency,
    also lays the foundation for the desired multi-language support.

By testing the Annotation Interface with the consulted \glsa{pgx} expert, I have
verified its efficacy at meetings its research aim and gained further insights
into what capabilities for data administration would be crucial if PharMe was
taken into a production setting with real users relying on it. Finally, I
illustrated the focus and key aspects of future work on the Annotation Interface
and PharMe's data administration as a whole based on these insights and the
previously made findings.

To reliably and responsibly provide users with data through health-related
informative resources such as PharMe, the need for human supervision in data
administration is apparent. The Annotation Interface as a system and as its
broader concept provides an approach to attend this need for PharMe. The
findings I have made within the context of research for and around the
Annotation Interface comprise relevant insights towards establishing systems to
solve similar problems for other health-related informative resources.
